I'm pleased to reminisce and speak about my relationship with Wales. I'm Dave Stephanie
Shirley, but in the time that I'm talking about, my name was Vera Buchtal. Nobody could
pronounce it because it was spelled B-U-C-H-T-H-A-L. I came over as an unaccompanied child refugee
from Nazi Europe and had settled with foster parents in the Midlands of England and with
whom I was very happy. I was doubly lucky because both my birth parents survived, but
sadly I never bonded with them again. That often happens when families are separated.
I was with my older sister. We couldn't bear to let go of each other because it was such
a major uprooting to come from one country to a new country, different language, different
parents, different food, different everything. It was traumatic. When we got to England,
we lived with our foster parents and I started to visit Osmousby where my mother had settled
around about 1942. She had gone to Osmousby partly because it was a border town and she
thought that would help in our assimilation. We knew one other family, the Ryders. There
was no antisemitism in Osmousby. Correction, certainly not as far as I'm concerned. I
was in Osmousby for six years from 1946 to 1951 and it was quite an important time for
me, partly because I needed peace and quiet after the turmoil of leaving Austria and my
parents and Osmousby gave me that. When I got to Osmousby, the unisex school apparently
announced that two little refugee girls were arriving and that they would be very disturbed
and everyone was to be very nice to us. Certainly that happened. We were not made to feel unwelcome
at all and I had no idea that the school had been primed for our ingress until years later.
I needed those six years of peace in Osmousby to put down roots. I was very conscious that
Osmousby is politically English but geographically Wales. On market days, the farmers came down
from the hills with their cattle and the whole town spoke Welsh, which I do not. It was a
very warm community. The other link that got us to Wales was my father's story. In 1940,
he was interned as an adult German to New South Wales, Australia and then got the opportunity
to come out of his internment camp and join the pioneer corps in England. First he was
in Bicester and then he was put in charge of what became the Mid Wales Psychiatric Hospital
at Talgarth. So for several years we would occasionally see him at Talgarth. I can remember
picking bilberries on the Brecon Beacons and really feeling the mountain environment that
I was accustomed to in Austria. There are lots of things that make Wales very dear to
me. I can remember my tears of joy when I heard people singing spontaneously on the
trains. Maybe I was going to Talgarth, which would happen very much in continental Europe.
And I sung in my school choir at the Iced Steadford in Langlaster one year. Later I was billeted
in Oakhurst, a hospital for girls. It was an old manor house that had been used commercially
by the Coventry Climax Company and is today back in private hands. Osborne Street Town
Council have brought up a blue plaque for me in the centre of the town alongside Wilfred
Owen, one of the great World War I poets. And I'm sponsoring a history of Oakhurst
as a thank you. I had the feeling of this quiet and musical country that valued education.
I think that resonated with me even as a child. So there are lots and lots of links with Wales.
My sister Renata was four years older than I, so she was nine when we arrived in England,
ten plus at Osborne Street. She became infected with the polio virus and was paralysed in
an iron lung at the orthopaedic hospital for ten months. The Park Hall Military Training
Establishment was there. So this small hall, Robert James and Agnes Hunt Hospital had wonderful
facilities and in particular they had penicillin, which was scarce in those days. She managed
to get two doses of penicillin a day for goodness knows how long. It was really rather remarkable
that they should do that for a refugee child. I've been to Osborne Street a couple of times
recently once to unveil the blue plaque when I met some Syrian refugees who'd also been
made to feel welcome. The town is starting to feel proud of its border status, that it
really can welcome different cultures and find them interesting without having to necessarily
wanting to change them. Osborne Street is especially important to me because unusually
they allowed me to study mathematics, which in those days girls did not do. The only science
thought respectable for girls of that generation was botany, the study of plants. But I wanted
to study maths and I was pretty firm about it. They put me through some psychological
testing and eventually agreed. But my girls' school did not have the capability to teach
maths at the school certificate level, we called it that then. And so I had to go to
the boys' school for all my maths lessons. So I was always walking between the two schools,
which had different timings. But thankfully somebody, somewhere, had enough sense to realise
that I should study mathematics. I wanted to and I had the capability. And that was
important to me because I spent my main career in the computer industry, which in the early
days was highly mathematical. So Oxford Street has made my career and I'm very conscious
of that. Starting at 18, I had a vigorous professional career which was thoroughly enjoyable
and now at age 88 I still enjoy work. When I nominally retired at the age of 60, I put
my energies and efforts into philanthropy. I operate as a venture philanthropist, not
just giving money to charities, though I do that as well, but seeing problems, working
out a solution, doing a feasibility study to see if we can make something happen. All
philanthropists, nothing to do with stamps by the way, all philanthropists aim to make
the world a fairer place. I suppose having been considered subhuman by the Nazis, I'm
conscious of my own position in the world and I'm dedicated to vulnerable people wherever
they are. In general, I work with people with autism spectrum disorders. I work with people
with autism disorders because that was my late son's condition. So three quarters of
my total spend of some 70 million to date is on autism and the rest is on my professional
discipline of information technology. These are the two things I know and care about.
There may be other things more important, but that is what I choose to do. I'm a very
good person. My venture philanthropy in autism resulted in quite a few Welsh projects. Because
I felt that a bilingual country was particularly hard for people with communication difficulties.
In 1999, a very invigorating and creative year for me, I started several projects, one
of which was called Autism Connect, which was a portal website on autism and that combined
with the Welsh the words, saving the Blondifredd School for Autism from closure. When my consultant
looked at this school, the physical conditions were ghastly with wooden boards going across
a muddy playground out to the toilets. You knew very well that no inspector would visit
because he would have to have the school closed down forthwith. But you could see the excellent
teaching of extremely vulnerable, difficult to reach children. So I was happy to be able
to contribute to Wales in keeping that school going. I visited it in the last few years.
It's now first class all round. I was also privileged to open the Ty Corridan School
for Autism in Cardiff. I've set up the all party parliamentary group for autism in Westminster,
and that had turned into the second largest such group. Because of that success, I tried
the same in Scotland, which failed, but was a success in Wales where the all party group
eventually merged with the national charity for Wales, Autism Cymru, which I also founded
and initially chaired. Autism Cymru had a lifespan of 11 years and took Wales to be
the first country in the world to have a national autism project. It was a success in the last
year. It also absorbed the Autism Connect portal website. As the National Ambassador
for Philanthropy in 2009 and 10, I spoke in the Senate Building to the Community Foundation
of Wales. I've set up another Welsh project about PEX, Picture Exchange Communication
System, where you're teaching children with, well, adults for that matter, with very little
communication capabilities. By looking at picture exchange, you'd show a picture and
it's word underneath. Tomorrow you would see the same picture with the word underneath.
You're trying to set up the association. Then day by day, the picture would get smaller
and smaller, leaving the word underneath. And many months later, the child is reading.
Very basic stuff, but the beginnings of communication when you've got somebody who is really without
speech. That project was also subsumed into Autism Cymru. Autism Cymru was instrumental
in getting the first chair in autism, I think, in the world, certainly in Britain. That was
at Cardiff University and was a big step forward. Bilingual Wales certainly led the British
Isles for some time in opening doors for people with autism and in looking after the half
a million autistic people and their families in Wales. And that's a quick summary of my
recollections of and relations with Wales.